---
layout: post
title:  "Feel Urgency - Making the Most of Your Professional Services Purchase"
date:   2014-10-28 12:00:00
categories: Operations Planning
---
I've noticed a common occurrence in all of my professional services engagements, a shift that happens at some point in each project; that has to happen in each project. All customers and all projects are different so I try not to draw conclusions for a new customer from my previous experience, but experience is a key reason why customers hire Intrinsic, or any other PS firm. Experience is where this generality is coming from.

Have you ever watched a basketball game where there is one player on the floor with the ability to absolutely take over. It could be LeBron James, Kevin Durant, Michael Jordan, Kobe Bryant, Magic Johnson, the list stretches back. Watching a game with a player like that you can see the moment when they decide, consciously or not, "now's the time". In college I played against one of those types of players. He had the will and the ability to single handedly change the outcome of the game. He was selfless most of the time, playing in the natural flow of the game and making his teammates better. However, if his team was losing near the end of the game, there was a point where he decided that it was time to do whatever made the biggest impact and usually that was keeping the ball and making one 3 pointer after another. If you wanted to beat his team you had to have a lead going into that point and you had to be able to weather that onslaught when he decided to unleash it. Every season our teams were in contention for the league championship and every time we played against each other I got to see that moment and I was one of the people who had to try to slow him down once he became The Hulk.

I bring this up not to make a point about those forces of basketball, but to point out how your successful project must be similar. Let me start by saying I'm not claiming to be the networking equivalent of a LeBron James or a Magic Johnson. I bring it up because every single project needs to move into Urgent mode in the same way that these players move into Hulk mode. When that shift occurs determines a lot about the success of the project and whether the project finishes on time and in budget.

When I come onsite to work with you, I'm ready for the project to be urgent. At least somebody at your company has decided that the project is urgent as well, but often there are those that don't yet have that sense of urgency. Not feeling urgency results in lots of different behaviors, good and bad. A well intentioned side effect that I've seen a number of times is that customers want their engineers to work with me looking over their shoulders. I'm all for this, it's a great way to learn. However, in most cases those engineers aren't able to focus enough on what they're doing to get it done quickly due to competing priorities. Unless the engineers' time is truly blocked they will feel pulled in a different direction and the project will drag.

What I find is that I'll come onsite and we'll spend the first half of the project working slowly. Either we're meandering while having (often valuable) conversations about future direction or related but not core technical questions, or we work, then wait, then work, then wait fitting work states in with the engineers' overpacked load of meetings and other required tasks. Eventually something happens, often it's me pointing out that we aren't going to achieve our goals in the time allotted, and then we start moving at full speed. It's usually not the first time that I've made a comment about our progress or the need to focus more, but it's the time that the comment takes root. Perhaps the engineer now how has the ammo they need to tell their boss that they have to put everything else down...and this time they mean it!

To some extent I don't mind this; I pride myself on being able to work in most any manner the customer would like to work with me. Perhaps this time it will be different, perhaps this is in fact a good focussed pace for this project. On the other hand I am trying to be protective of your time; the time that you've purchased from Intrinsic, your project deadlines and your engineers' overloaded schedules. What happens is that we finish in a rush, either pushed by customer deadlines or by the end of the consulting engagement. Customer engineers no longer have time to work with me and have me show them what I'm doing. If we're working under the pressure of project deadlines I might wind up having to do the pieces we don't get to after the end of the working day and hope that the customer will review what I've done and ask questions to understand it down the road. If we're reaching the end of a time and materials 'bucket' of time then the engineer might have to pick up some tasks that I was intended to do. Both of these leave engineers unhappy as they either don't feel they have an understanding of what it is that I've done or they feel that I didn't do everything they wanted me to do.

How can you prevent this from happening?
<ul>
<li>We must have a kickoff conference call - This is a way to make sure that everybody is on the same page about the goals, the schedule and the intended work style

<li>Your engineers must prepare - Even if I'm the sole party responsible for a project, you're still going to have to tell me about the environment I'm connecting to and provide me with all the information and requirements I'll need to do my work. This doesn't have to involve creating anything, but it will at least involve pulling together documentation or existing configurations.

<li>Your engineers must block some time - This is dependent on work style, but at the very least somebody is going to have to help me get in the door and into my workspace. Somebody will have to talk with me about the documentation requirements. This doesn't necessarily have to be when I'm onsite; if we set the right expectations for a conference call we can do this in advance, but it'll be much easier if you give me the documents beforehand so that I can review them and prepare myself. If you intend to work with me the whole time, make sure that you aren't getting pulled away, if you can't ensure that then understand that I'm going to have to continue working without you if I can.

<li>The people around your engineers must protect that set-aside time - This is for managers, project managers, colleagues and downstream customers. It can be very hard to accommodate your engineer setting aside their regular work for a day, a week, more, but it is necessary for success. If they can't put things down for a week, then give them time to prepare the information that I'll need and to kick off the project with me and set the expectation with them that they will be an observer of the project, and can't be a gate.
</ul>
I've had some customers do a great job of those last two. The engineers put aside big blocks of time to work with me and they accomplish it. It seems to me that this has worked because they have then spent every night of our time together catching up on their day jobs. What has worked well is customers who block out portions of their day to work with me, then work with me to organize my work around those blocks so that we can have discussions when they have blocked their time but I can implement our plans when they are away.
